At the Harvard Observatory in the late 1800s, Edward Charles Pickering started collecting a large collection of photographic plates of stars. Due to the large amounts of data, he realized that he was going to need to hire a lot of extra help to analyze and keep track of the data. Because at that time women were paid relatively less than men for the same job, he hired a bunch of women to compute and catalog the extensive data they were getting at only 25 cents an hour. In those days, someone who did calculations was called a “computer,” hence they were known as the Harvard “Computers.” Initially, they were told to do the mundane tasks of just computing and copying the actual positions and brightness of the stars, but as time went on, many were able to make sense of the patterns and started to make many amazing discoveries of their own. 
One notable woman that was an instrumental part of the discoveries done by Harvard “Computers” is Williamina Fleming. She is most known for her work on the classification of stellar spectra. She developed the Pickering-Fleming system which basically classified stars by their spectra based on the strength of the star’s hydrogen spectral line. She did this alphabetically so the strongest hydrogen line she gave the name of A star, then B star, and so on. Then came along Antonia Maury, who was the first Harvard “Computer” with an astronomy degree. She noticed that not only did stars have different strengths, they also had different widths which led her to come up with a new way classification scheme with numbers and not letters.
The works of both Williamina and Antonia were continued by Annie Jump Cannon in the years following. She created a stellar classification system that ranges from 7 different letters (O, B, A, F, G, K, M) based on the star’s surface temperature. Soon after in 1922, the International Astronomical Union adopted this system as its official classification method and it is something we still use today. Later, L, T, and Y were added to the system of stellar classification because some stars did not shine through thermonuclear fusion. The range of this spectrum is really large as the class O star’s surface temperature range from 25,000-50,000 K and includes bluish-white stars, while the class Y stars are brown dwarfs and are about 800 K. She was able to make these distinctions by associating them with the temperature of hydrogen. At this point in time, the surface temperature of a star could only be classified by using one of the 7 letters. However, Cecilia Payne came and changed that. Payne looked at the spectral line of the stars and with the help of an astrophysicist, Meghnad N. Saha, they were able to study the thermal ionization of atoms and come up with the Saha equations that described the relationship between the spectra of stars and the exact temperature. “He showed how to use an equilibrium equation from physical chemistry to relate the ratio of excited states to ground states, and the fraction of ionized states to the temperature, electron concentration, ionization potential, and other properties of the stellar atmosphere.” Furthermore, scientists were under the impression that a large amount of material in the universe was made up of similar things to Earth, however, using these equations, she was able to discover that unlike what most people thought then, stars were primarily made up of hydrogen and helium with only 2% consisting of the rest of the periodic table. By applying Saha equations to the Balmer series absorption in hydrogen and found that in the Sun’s atmosphere, there are about 200 million hydrogen atoms in the excited state which is a lot less than previously thought. She did the same for helium and for many other stars, finding similar results. At that time, Henty Norris Russell did not accept this discovery, however, it was later discovered that the Milky Way Galaxy is made up of 74% hydrogen, 24% helium, and 2% everything else proving Payne correct.
Another notable woman who worked as a Harvard “Computer” was Henrietta Swan Leavitt. During her time working, she overlapped multiple plates on top of another and noticing the brightness change from different exposures. Through doing this, she discovered nearly 2,400 variable stars during her time and also found that some stars have a consistent brightness despite of their location making it easier to measure the distance from Earth. This allowed astronomers to have distance markers in the galaxy to see how far stars were from Earth. In the 1920s, the astronomer Edwin Hubble used her findings to show that the universe is in fact expanding.
	Looking at the works of many of these women, it is truly fascinating to see the discoveries that they came up with despite the lack of technology. Especially at a time when women were hardly given jobs that required critical thinking, these Harvard “Computers” were able to find things that would even be remarkable today. The stellar classification discovered by Annie Jump Cannon and further developed by others is still used today as it is whats plotted on the horizontal axis on a H-R diagram. Using these developments, we can plot the clusters that we are going to be looking at and identify blue stragglers and other characteristics. 
